as any other system linux also has a graphical user interface that works similar to other operaating systems.
the comand line is a beast, we can think of as adding to the graphical user interface GUI, many people open the command line or the terminal as a new tab on thier GUI.
This is also to our advantage as we can have several command lines open and doing different tasks in each at the same time. We can also easily jump back to the GUI when it suits us.
a command line is a text based interface to interact with the system.
commands are entered by writting " typing them into the terminal", and a feddback will be given similary as text.
command line presents the user with a prompt, what we type will be displayed after the prompt and for the most ofthe time you will be issuing commands.
the first when you open a terminal displays the user name.
there must be a space between the command and the first argument.
after you type a command for example pwd which stands for print working directory the output wil be displayed in text
after that the you will be presented by a prompt again.
terminal wont have line numbers.opening a terminal is easy and simple.
the following are the steps for oppening it taken from the linux tutorial link
1) If you're on a Mac then you'll find the program Terminal under Applications -> Utilities. An easy way to get to it is the key combination 'command + space' which will bring up Spotlight, then start typing Terminal and it will soon show up.
2) If on Linux then you will probably find it in Applications -> System or Applications -> Utilities. Alternatively you may be able to 'right-click' on the desktop and there may be an option 'Open in terminal'.
3) If you are on Windows and intend to remotely log into another machine then you will need an SSH client. A rather good one is Putty (free) .
------------------------------------------------
the shell bash
within the terminal there is the shell, it is  a part of the operating system defines how the terminal will behave, many types of shells are available the most common one is the bash that stands for  Bourne again shell.
If you would like to know which shell you are using you may use a command called echo to display a system variable stating your current shell. echo is a command which is used to display messages.
important note:As long as it prints something to the screen that ends in bash then all is good.

a good thing is that linux is full of shortcuts, they help us avoid silly mistakes and typos.
Here's your first shortcut. When you enter commands,
 they are actually stored in a history. You can traverse this history using the up and down arrow keys. 
So don't bother re-typing out commands.
--------------------------------------------------------
chosing a text editor.
A text editor is a piece of software that you download and install on your computer, or you access online through your web browser, that
allows you to write and manage text, especially the text that you write to build a web site. The text editor has to be one of the most
important tools you can use as an aspiring web developer.
should we use any text editor or are there features we should look for.
the follosing are some features you definitely should look for in a text editor.
1) code completion 
2) syntax highlighting 
3) a nice variety of themes
4) ) the ability to choose from a healthy selection of
extensions available when you need them
some software comes with your computer already installed.
on mac its called "Text Edit", for windows it is called "Notepad", And on Linux computers, each distribution will have its own text
editor already installed but which one might depend on the flavor of
your particular distribution.

why should you download a text editor since you already have one? the text editors that come on your
computer don’t have many features to speak of. They’re the barest
bare bones text editors you’ll encounter.

what are examples of text editors?
1) VS code:VS Code has the Emmet shorthand for HTML and CSS
already built-in VS Code has
everything: syntax highlighting, themes, extensions and code
completion.

2) notepad++: NotePad++ is a free text editor for Windows Computers only.

3)TextWrangler: for mac computers only, t TextWrangler has been retired, 
4)BB Edit: you have to purchase it if you dont you will have same features as TextWrangler
5) Brackets: free for all operating systems, made by adobe, Brackets only supports HTML, CSS and JavaScript, though
more coding capabilities can be added through extensions. Sublime Text 3 is a premium software that can be purchased in full
for $70. Otherwise you’ll use the free version, offers syntax highlighting, themes, extensions, and code completion. 
6)Atom: free and available for all operating systems,  . Atom is brought to
you by the folks at GitHub also has the cool features of vscode, syntax highlighting, themes, extensions, 
7) Sublime Text



how is a text editor different from a IDE?
the text editor title gives away what it does "text editor" edits text. It also manages text, and manages files
wrangler for example wrangles your text together into something meaningful
IDE stands for integrated developer enviroment. like microsoft outlook, an all in one software package------------------------------------
some more about files
everything is a file, even your keyboard is a file (one that the system reads from only) any hardware connected is a file in that manner.
the hardest thing to get is that linux as an extentionless system, a file extention is normally 2-4 characters.
examples?
file.exe - an executable file, or program.
file.txt - a plain text file.
file.png, file.gif, file.jpg - an image.
windows must have extension on its files, but not linux, it actually ignores the extension and looks inside the file to to determine the type.
when ever we specify a file or a directory in a command line it is a path, also directories are just a special type of files.
an important note to notice is that linux case sensitive with names commands simply A is not a.
----------
a space is how we seperate arguments on the command line but how do we cd for intance to a file that has a space in the name?
1 use quotes like cd 'that file'
2 you can use escape characters cd that\ file
-------
a usefull shortcut.
In the previous section we learnt about something called Tab Completion. If you use that before encountering the space in the directory name then the terminal will automatically escape any spaces in the name for you.

-------------------------
hidden files and directories.
linux is simple when it comesto hidden files, if a file name begins with a ."dot", it considered hidden.
to view files use command ls
to view everythhing hidden and read files use ls -a
--------------------------------
a quick summary.
everything in linux is a file
linux is extensionless it looks in a file to know what type it is
case sensitivels -a : views hidden files.
file: obtain information about what type of file a file or directory is.




